+++
date = "2022-11-20T11:00:00-05:00"
title = "What's Next?"
author = "Michael Novak"
description = "Thoughts on music and the realization that it is what's next."
+++

Every time I ask myself what's next it always comes back to music. This is a post about what's next, but more importantly music.

<!--more-->

### Where it started

As far back as I remember everything has been about music for me. I learned how to write my first HTML by creating a very very static catalog of my physical media music collection. The exercise was to learn how to build a website, not really to statically catalog my music collection. When I was trying to figure out what to start with, something music immediately came to mind. When I got into college I realized that my focus was going to be computers and writing software, I spent a lot of my time helping build a record label website. The label and site may not have lasted but it was so fun to build. It wasn't about the technical challenge and there certainly wasn't anything unique about that particular implementation; it was about the music and the relationships that were built around the music. I wanted to focus all my time around things related to music and technology. Life happens and I ended up working on mostly things unrelated to music for the next few years. Even though I wasn't working on music related projects, music was still the soundtrack to just about everything I did. Commuting everyday never without headphones, working in various open offices with music going all day long. 

Once the iPhone and the first Android phones started to ship there was a whole new platform to build upon. I contributed a small amount of code to the Last.fm Android project at one point, reminding me how much I loved working on music products. I met Guenther Beyer online while I started building an open source RSS reader for Android. He released a few Android styled icons free for anyone to use and I reached out to ask if he could help me design the RSS reader. I was using Linux as my primary workstation at the time and had my full music collection locally using Songbird as my music player. Guenther completed the designs for the RSS reader and I started working on it but never shipped it. I discovered within Songbird there was a plugin that would show you all the tour dates for the artists you had in your collection. I reached out to Guenther and explained how the plugin worked and how I wanted to build this for mobile devices. The plugin was using data from Songkick and they had an API you could use to access all the concert data. There was a Music Hack Day[^1] coming up in New York and I was excited to go and build out my new project there surrounded by lots of other people hacking away on all sorts of music related projects. Twenty four hours later and I had a really rough first version of Gigbeat[^2]. The concept got some immediate recognition by Billboard Magazine and a few of the music industry attendees. Armed with excitement and ambition we set out to build a true first version of the app for Android. September of that year we released version 1.0 to the Android store. Within a few months the app was featured on the front page of the Android Market and being downloaded several hundred thousand times. It was so much fun to work on and we had a lot of big ideas for it. All along the way we met people that would tell us to find something else other than music to work on. There was no real way to keep that product moving, it was a mobile version of Songkick and even our bigger vision for it was likely too early to get the kind of adoption we would need. It was unfortunately time to move on from that project.

### A music detour

The scale of music around the world is huge. The amount of music, styles of music and cultures of music around the world is staggering to think about. While the music itself can be very different, we have music in common just about everywhere. Music is really personal and sharing that experience is something pretty incredible. You can run through so many different emotions with music. The heartbreak all the way through to that certified bop that accompanies a party among friends. I listen to so many different genres of music. I find things to enjoy in just about everything I listen to. The story and experience the artist is making with their music is fascinating. For many it isn't even just about the music. The artwork that accompanies the music, the videos that are made can really bring life to the music. When you have a connection to music there's something special, something that just hits differently. I can still vividly remember the first time I heard Dashboard Confessional. The raw sound of an acoustic guitar and the vocals singing some incredibly written lyrics. It was so stripped down but incredibly powerful. I hadn't experience music in quite that way before and I wanted more of it. A friend in high school gave me a copy of Jimmy Eat World's[^3] Clarity. This album was on repeat for me for so long. Everything about it was incredible to me. Next came Thursday's[^4] Full Collapse and Taking Back Sunday's[^5] Tell All Your Friends. 

I could go on and on about all these bands but there's two experiences in particular I'm going to call out. I have seen Jimmy Eat World just about every chance I have had in New York. A few years back the played back to back shows at Brooklyn Steel. I had tickets for the first night, but by the end of that first night I had tickets to both nights. Jimmy Eat World puts a lot of effort into their live shows, they care deeply about the live sound and have talked about it in interviews. It goes back to the personal aspect of music. I've listened to this band for over twenty years, through so many different periods and times in life. My experience listening to them can be and probably is different than someone else. These songs can take on a very personal meaning and it doesn't take away from the music or anyone's experience of it. That first show was so incredible I had to be back there for the second night. I saw Vaultboy and Nightly two weeks ago. I was a bit familiar with the opener Vaultboy, but not nearly as familiar as I am with Nightly. Vaultboy during the set had mentioned that he was going through stuff and having a hard time and wrote a song to himself. The song starts with just vocals, and is stripped down. In this dark venue up on the stage by himself he performed an incredible song. The room was completely quiet, everyone taking in this incredibly personal song. You could just feel it in that room, and at a point in the song it comes to complete silence briefly before building up. It felt like the oxygen was sucked right out of the room. It was one of the most incredible performances I've seen in a long time. I love Nightly, they have such an awesome sound and their writing is incredible, but that night I left a big fan of Vaultboy. I'm going to see them again in Philadelphia in a few weeks. In February I'm going to Nashville to see Mitchell Tenpenny, his new album is incredible.

There's been so much music lately that I have had on repeat and I could write about it all extensively, but that would take too long. At the end of this post is a playlist, I created it as a representation of me as a music fan. There's a lot of different music on it and won't fit into any bucket. It reflects a lot of what I am too, not fitting into any one bucket. Music is amazing in that way, and if you want to see what it looks like when someone just loves music so much just go watch this Zane Lowe on TikTok[^6]. It is pretty great.

### Where it is going

I have had the opportunity to take some time to think about what's next. It wasn't entirely in my control, but the opportunity was there. I have been playing around with some more music ideas, some of which have been in various forms of progress for years now. I'm working on a new music project that I'll be able to share a lot more on soon, but it focuses more on the human side to music. The personal side of it and the shared experience of music. No algorithms, no machine learning. I want to build the music experience I've always wanted, and so that's what I'm going to do. 

Below are links to a playlist that was getting long pretty quickly but is a collection of the songs that have been in my heavy rotation at some point. This is not an exhaustive playlist, but take a look.

[Me on Apple Music](https://music.apple.com/us/playlist/me/pl.u-BrxetYYdy9j)

[Me on Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/playlist/2bpe0cCpOVhEZBzeqwSYvo?si=53c66bc14ea24352)

[^1]: There aren't any current dates, but the website has previous years on it. [Music Hack Day](http://www.musichackday.org/)
[^2]: Here's one of the mentions of Gigbeat [Top 6 apps for going to concerts](https://www.huffpost.com/entry/top-6-apps-for-going-to-concerts_b_1871989)
[^3]: [Jimmy Eat World](https://www.jimmyeatworld.com/)
[^4]: [Thursday](https://www.thursday.net/)
[^5]: [Taking Back Sunday](https://takingbacksunday.com/)
[^6]: This, all day. [Zane Lowe TikTok](https://www.tiktok.com/t/ZTRQVEJ71/)
